Welcome to the alpha preview of JBrowse, a proposed successor to GBrowse. This preview is intended for members of WormBase staff only.

The staff preview of JBrowse is available at 

      http://jbrowse.wormbase.org/.

For now, the landing page lists available species. The most complete species
is of course C. elegans.

BACKGROUND

JBrowse is the "next gen" "replacement" for GBrowse.  I put the replacement
in quotes because I don't expect GBrowse to go away any time soon, so really
it's more of a compliment.  JBrowse is designed to be faster than GBrowse with
better navigation of large numbers of tracks and tools for quantitative data
visualiation.

NOTES AND LIMITATIONS OF THE CURRENT IMPLEMENTATION 

1. Available data: Currently there are about 55 tracks but I will continue
to add more.  If there are data you'd particularly like to see, please let 
me know and I'll get it in as soon as possible.

2. Selecting tracks: JBrowse comes with a faceted track selector.  To
access it, click on the "Select tracks" tab near the upper left corner.  The 
track selector allows users to select tracks based on metadata provided about
the tracks.  In the current instance, that means the track names, categories 
(which are both the same as in GBrowse) and citation (that is, description text
about the track). Tracks can be selected in a variety of ways, including clicking
on categories on the left or using the search field in the upper right section of the
selector to dynamically search all metadata of the tracks.  Turning on tracks
can be accomplished either by clicking checkboxes next to each
track name or by clicking the checkbox next to the "Name" header of the table
to turn them all on. There is currently a limit of 30 tracks that
you can turn on at once by clicking on the "Name" checkbox, but you can have
more than 30 tracks in JBrowse at once. Please let me know if you have 
suggestions for facets/metadata that I could add to make this searching
more useful.

3. Navigation: One of the big selling points of JBrowse is fast and fluid
panning and zooming.  Generally you get around JBrowse the same way as
GBrowse: there are pan and zoom in and out buttons (the big magnifying glasses
zoom "a lot" and the little ones zoom "a little").  In addition to using
the buttons, you can pan by clicking and dragging the mouse in any
empty space in the tracks.  You can also zoom in a way that is similar to
GBrowse, by clicking and dragging to highlight the region to zoom to and
release it.  You can do that either on the chromosome ruler (above the
navigation buttons) or on the region ruler (below the navigation buttons).

4. Searching: You can use the search box in the upper right section of the
screen to search for feature names and aliases, so for example unc-1,
K03E6.5 and WBGene00006741 should all work.  The search box has name
completion, so typing in the first few characters will get you suggested
things to search for. 	

5. Using your own data: JBrowse let's you load BAM or BigWig data but it 
works differently from GBrowse.  In GBrowse, when you want to load your 
own data, you upload it to a server which processes the data and sends
images back.  With JBrowse, the files are kept locally and processed
by the JavaScript code in the browser.  To load your own data files, use
the Open option in the File menu in the upper left corner of the JBrowse
window. In addition to processing local files, you can also provide a
URL in the Open dialog box that points to a BAM or BigWig file on a server.

5. Combination tracks: Also under that File menu is the "Add combination
track" menu. This is a fairly powerful function that lets you combine the
results in two tracks using a variety of logical operations as well as 
allowing one track to be used as a mask for another track.  To use it
you select that option from the menu and then using the track labels on
the left side of the track, drag the tracks you want to combine into 
the combination track region.  After you drag the second track in,
a window will open with options for how to combine the tracks.

6. Sequence searching: JBrowse has a way to search for short nucleotide
sequences, though it works a little differently from how it used to work
with GBrowse.  To look for the sequence of interest, select the "Add
sequence search track" from the File menu and it will open a window
asking for the sequence (DNA or amino acid, which it searches for by 
translating the reference sequence) as well as items like ignore case 
and limiting to one strand.  Additionally, you can provide a regular
expression to search for, so you could search for something like this
"at[gc]" and it would search for either "atg" or "atc".  It doesn't 
know about IUPAC codes (well, I don't think it does anyway).  It also
won't tell you about other places in the genome that the sequence might
exist, it will only draw a glyph where the sequence is found in the
current display. Once you create a sequence search track, that track will 
remain until it is dismissed with the "x" next to the track name just like
any other track.



For further reading, please see the official JBrowse user guides and tutorials:

    http://gmod.org/wiki/JBrowse and 
    http://jbrowse.org/code/JBrowse-1.11.4/docs/tutorial/
